Notes
=====
* the page http://www.angelfire.com/ult/ace/WZD_SotD_bestiary.html has extra
beastiary info that will be helpful in deciphering other lists, and/or getting
ideas for monsters. I have basically copy/pasted the below traits from that
page, as they detail classic Wizardry monster traits. However, as a result of
the unedited copy of information, some items will need to be tweaked to match
the game mechanics detailed elsewhere in the documentation.

Monster Traits
==============

UNIDENTIFIED: Unless you've cast the Level 3 Priest spell Latumapic, the
identity of randomly encountered monsters is sometimes unknown, which adds an
element of uncertainy to battles. Fighting these vague shapes for a bit will
usually reveal what they really are (if you survive that long).

CLASSIFICATION: What monster group/family the creature belongs to. Take
particular note of Undead entities, as they can potentially be turned
(banished) by Priests, Bishops, and Lords. Similarly, some weapons and armor
are particularly effective against certain types of foes.

EXPERIENCE LEVEL: A numerical measure of how powerful a creature is. Stronger
monsters are more dangerous, but they also yield greater rewards upon defeat.

EXPERIENCE POINTS: A numerical bounty you earn for killing the creature (which
is divided equally amongst your surviving party members). At set quotas, which
are different for each character class, accumulated experience points can be
"cashed-in" at the inn to increase a player character's experience level.

HIT POINTS: A numerical measure of a creature's life/health, as determined by
the indicated die roll. Reducing it to zero kills the monster. The point spread
represents the natural variation one would see in nature (i.e., some people are
weaker/tougher than normal, but most are in the average range). Take note that
some stronger monsters can regenerate (heal) a set number of hit points every
round, which makes them more difficult to put down.

ARMOR CLASS: A numerical measure of how easy/difficult it is to strike a
target. Typically, this is a reflection of an individual's physical resistance
to injury, but things like size, dodging ability, unusual physiology, etc. can
also contribute to the AC rating. Unlike the other statistics, when it comes to
AC, the lower the number, including negative values, the better (an unarmored
human/demihuman has a natural AC of 10). Contrary to what one might expect,
Armor Class does not actually reduce/mitigate damage, instead, it's an
"all-or-nothing" affair--if an attack roll overcomes the player's or monster's
AC value, then damage is successfully dealt, if it doesn't, they miss.
Remember: Armor Class DOES NOT protect against breath attacks or spells, only
physical attacks!!!

NUMBER APPEARING: How many of the creatures you will encounter in a group,
which is determined by the indicated die roll. Some powerful monsters are only
encountered alone (which you should be thankful for), but most creatures tend
to believe in strength in numbers.

PHYSICAL ATTACKS: A monster's "normal" offense. A creature with multiple
physical attacks must direct them all at a single target; it can't attack
several party members at once (i.e., a monster with three physical attacks can
potentially hit one character up to three times, but it can't divide those
strikes up amongst three separate characters.) There's also no guarantee that
all of those blows will successfully hit (i.e., a monster with four physical
attacks may only manage to land two of them on your character, which results
in less damage). Beware! In addition to damage, some monsters' physical attacks
may also inflict negative status effects, permanently drain experience levels,
or even result in the loss of your head!

ATTACK BACK ROW: Most monsters can only physically attack the first three
members of your party (the front row), however creatures with this ability have
a longer reach and/or projectiles which allows them to strike any of your party
members, regardless of their tactical position (time to die, you cowardly back
row Mages!).

DECAPITATION: Instant death! While a variety of creatures can perform this
feat, Ninja are the most infamous. No matter how powerful your characters
become, they're always at risk of having their heads lopped off by creatures
with this ability.

LEVEL DRAIN: Monsters with this ability (usually high-level Undead) can
PERMANENTLY take away one (or more) of your character's experience levels,
which is obviously something you want to avoid at all costs. Short of
re-earning those experience points all over again, the Level 7 Mage spell
Mahaman is the only way that you can restore those lost levels, but, even then,
the character who employs said spell must forfeit an experience level in
casting it, so you're always on the losing end of that equation.

SPELL LEVELS: Some monsters can cast Mage and/or Priest spells. The level (1-7)
indicates their degree of expertise, and the percentage indicates the
probability that they'll attempt to cast a spell during any given round of
combat. See the Spellbook section, farther down the page, for more details.

BREATH ATTACK: A special ability that affects your ENTIRE party. The percentage
indicates the likelihood that the monster will use it during a round of combat.
A variety of creatures employ breath attacks, but dragons are the textbook
example. Usually these exhalations just inflict damage, but some breath attacks
can also cause negative status effects, like poisoning/petrification, or, worse
of all, instant death. It's always a good idea to cast the Level 3 Mage spell
Cortu if you're facing a creature(s) that has a breath attack.

ALL FOR REINFORCEMENTS: When the going gets tough, the tough screams for help!
Some monsters (particularly demons/devils) can call out for an ally (of their
own species) to join them in battle. The percentage indicates the probability
of success. Remember: No single monster group can exceed nine members, so
there's (thankfully) a limit to how many buddies they can accumulate.

RUN AWAY: Some creatures are cowardly (or smart enough to know when they're
outclassed) and will flee combat rather than fight. Thieves and Mages are
particularly prone to deserting their allies in battle. The percentage
indicates the likelihood of the monster making a run for it during each round
of combat. You don't earn any experience points for monsters that get away, but
you still get their treasure/gold.

SPELL RESISTANCE: Unfortunately for your spellcasters, some creatures have a
degree of immunity to magic. The percentage indicates the likelihood of your
magic failing when cast on said creatures (for example, a monster with 80%
universal spell resistance is only affected by magic 20% of the time, which are
pretty bad odds--better hope your fighters know their stuff). If a spell
doesn't overcome a monster's resistance, then it's wasted and has absolutely no
effect.

ELEMENTAL & STATUS EFFECT RESISTANCE: Some creatures are resistant to heat,
cold, etc. While they can still be injured by such assaults, they only take
half damage. For example, casting the freezing spell Madalto on a Frost Giant
wouldn't be the soundest tactical decision.

FRIENDLY MONSTERS: Contrary to popular belief, not all monsters are
bloodthirsty maniacs. Occasionally, you'll encounter friendly specimens. In
such cases, you are presented with a choice of letting them go unmolested or
attacking them (the course of action you take will likely affect the alignment
of any Good or Evil characters in your party, which can have detrimental
consequences, so choose wisely). Alas, some monsters species really are evil
beyond redemption and will always fight to the death.

COMPANIONS: Most creatures are known to associate with another monster species,
or additional groups of their own kind (again, Wizardry critters are firm
believers in safety in numbers). The percentage indicated is the likelihood of
those buddies being present at the start of the fight (i.e., there's a 40%
chance that Lesser Demons will be accompanied by a group of 1d3 Wing Demons).
Be aware that these "sidekicks" stack! Continuing with the Lesser Demon
example, there's a 25% chance that said Wing Demons will be accompanied by
ANOTHER Wing Demon group, and so forth. Thankfully, no single battle can
consist of more than four monster groups, so there is a limit to these
shenanigans.
